..
  SPDX-FileCopyrightText: Copyright (c) 2025-2026 NVIDIA CORPORATION & AFFILIATES. All rights reserved.

  Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
  you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
  You may obtain a copy of the License at

  http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

  Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
  distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
  WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
  See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
  limitations under the License.

  SPDX-License-Identifier: Apache-2.0

.. _keycloak_setup:

================================================
Keycloak as a sample IdP
================================================

This guide describes how to deploy `Keycloak <https://www.keycloak.org/>`_ and configure it as the identity provider (IdP) for OSMO. Keycloak acts as an authentication broker, allowing OSMO to authenticate users through various identity providers (LDAP, SAML, social logins) while providing centralized group and role management.

.. note::

   Keycloak is one option for an IdP. OSMO can also connect directly to other providers such as Microsoft Entra ID, Google, or AWS IAM Identity Center without Keycloak. See :doc:`authentication/identity_provider_setup` for direct IdP configuration.

When to use Keycloak
====================

Use Keycloak when:

- You want a self-hosted identity broker that can federate multiple upstream identity providers (LDAP, SAML, OIDC) behind a single OIDC interface for OSMO.
- You need centralized user, group, and role management in a dedicated admin console.
- You want to manage pool access by assigning Keycloak roles to groups rather than configuring each user individually.

If you already have a single IdP (e.g., Microsoft Entra ID) and do not need a broker, connecting OSMO directly to that IdP is simpler. See :doc:`authentication/identity_provider_setup`.

Part 1: Deploy Keycloak
========================

Step 1: Create a Keycloak database
-----------------------------------

If you are using an external PostgreSQL instance, create a database for Keycloak. Omit
``export OSMO_PGPASSWORD=...`` and ``PGPASSWORD=$OSMO_PGPASSWORD`` if PostgreSQL was configured
without a password.

.. code-block:: bash

  $ export OSMO_DB_HOST=<your-db-host>
  $ export OSMO_PGPASSWORD=<your-postgres-password>
  $ kubectl apply -f - <<EOF
  apiVersion: v1
  kind: Pod
  metadata:
    name: osmo-db-ops
  spec:
    containers:
      - name: osmo-db-ops
        image: alpine/psql:17.5
        command: ["/bin/sh", "-c"]
        args:
          - "PGPASSWORD=$OSMO_PGPASSWORD psql -U postgres -h $OSMO_DB_HOST -p 5432 -d postgres -c 'CREATE DATABASE keycloak;'"
    restartPolicy: Never
  EOF

Check that the process ``Completed`` with ``kubectl get pod osmo-db-ops``. Then delete the pod with:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ kubectl delete pod osmo-db-ops

Step 2: Install Keycloak with Helm
------------------------------------

a. Add the Bitnami Helm repository:

.. code-block:: bash

  $ helm repo add bitnami https://charts.bitnami.com/bitnami
  $ helm repo update

b. Create a ``keycloak-values.yaml`` file with the following configuration:

.. dropdown:: ``keycloak-values.yaml``
  :color: info
  :icon: file

  .. code-block:: yaml
    :emphasize-lines: 12, 24, 30-43, 66-80

    global:
      security:
        allowInsecureImages: true

    image:
      registry: docker.io
      repository: bitnamilegacy/keycloak
      tag: 26.1.1-debian-12-r0

    # Hostname configuration
    hostname: auth-<your-domain>
    proxy: edge

    # Production mode
    production: true
    tls:
      enabled: true
      autoGenerated: true

    # Admin user credentials
    auth:
      adminUser: admin
      adminPassword: your-secure-password  # Change this!

    # Ingress configuration
    ingress:
      enabled: true
      tls: true
      ingressClassName: <your-ingress-class>  # e.g., nginx, alb
      hostname: auth-<your-domain>
      annotations:
        # Add additional ingress-specific annotations here to match your ingress controller
        # Example for AWS ALB:
        # alb.ingress.kubernetes.io/target-type: ip
        # alb.ingress.kubernetes.io/group.name: osmo
        # alb.ingress.kubernetes.io/group.order: "0"
        # alb.ingress.kubernetes.io/scheme: internet-facing
        # alb.ingress.kubernetes.io/certificate-arn: <your-ssl-cert-arn>
        # alb.ingress.kubernetes.io/listen-ports: '[{"HTTPS":443}]'
        # alb.ingress.kubernetes.io/ssl-redirect: '443'

      path: /
      pathType: Prefix
      servicePort: 80

    # Autoscaling configuration
    autoscaling:
      enabled: true
      minReplicas: 2
      maxReplicas: 3
      targetCPU: 80
      targetMemory: 80

    # Resource allocation
    resources:
      requests:
        cpu: "500m"
        memory: "512Mi"
      limits:
        cpu: "2"
        memory: "1Gi"

    # Database configuration
    # Option 1: External Database
    postgresql:
      enabled: false
    externalDatabase:
      host: "<your-db-host>"
      port: 5432
      user: "<your-db-user>"
      database: "keycloak"
      existingSecret: "keycloak-db-secret"
      existingSecretPasswordKey: "postgres-password"

    # Option 2: Built-in PostgreSQL (for testing)
    # postgresql:
    #   enabled: true

    # Additional environment variables
    extraEnvVars:
      - name: KC_HOSTNAME_STRICT_HTTPS
        value: "true"
      - name: KC_PROXY
        value: "edge"

c. Create the namespace for Keycloak:

.. code-block:: bash

  $ kubectl create namespace keycloak

d. If you are using an external database, create a secret for the database password:

.. code-block:: bash

  $ kubectl create secret generic keycloak-db-secret \
    --namespace keycloak \
    --from-literal=postgres-password='<your-db-password>'

e. Install Keycloak using Helm:

.. code-block:: bash

  $ helm install keycloak bitnami/keycloak \
    --version 24.4.9 \
    --namespace keycloak \
    -f keycloak-values.yaml

f. Verify the installation:

.. code-block:: bash

  $ kubectl get pods -n keycloak
  $ kubectl get ingress -n keycloak

.. note::
  To access the Keycloak instance, configure DNS records to point to your load balancer. For example, create a record for ``auth-osmo.example.com`` pointing to the load balancer IP.

If you have DNS configured, access the Keycloak instance at ``https://auth-osmo.example.com``.
If DNS is not configured, use port forwarding:

.. code-block:: bash

  $ kubectl port-forward service/keycloak 32080:80 -n keycloak

.. _keycloak_post_installation_configuration:

Step 3: Post-installation configuration
-----------------------------------------

a. Access your Keycloak instance at ``https://auth-osmo.example.com``

b. Log in with the admin credentials specified in the values file

c. Create a new realm for OSMO:

   1. Download the sample realm file: :download:`sample_osmo_realm.json <../getting_started/sample_osmo_realm.json>`
   2. Click on the dropdown menu on the top left which says ``master`` and select ``Create Realm``
   3. Enter the downloaded realm file in the ``Resource file`` field and click ``Create``
   4. You will be redirected to the ``osmo`` realm

d. Click on the ``Clients`` tab and for each of the ``osmo-browser-flow`` and ``osmo-device``
   clients, update the client settings:

   * Root URL: ``https://osmo.example.com``
   * Home URL: ``https://osmo.example.com``
   * Admin URL: ``https://osmo.example.com``
   * Valid Redirect URIs: ``https://osmo.example.com/*``
   * Web Origins: ``https://osmo.example.com``

   .. note::
     Replace ``osmo.example.com`` with your actual OSMO domain name.

e. On the ``osmo-browser-flow`` client details page, click on the ``Credentials`` tab and
   create and save a client secret. You will need this when configuring OSMO's OAuth2 Proxy sidecar.

Part 2: Configure OSMO to use Keycloak
=======================================

With Keycloak deployed and the ``osmo`` realm configured, follow the standard OSMO deployment
steps in :doc:`../getting_started/deploy_service`, substituting the Keycloak-specific OIDC
endpoints shown below for the generic IdP placeholders.

Keycloak endpoints
------------------

All endpoints are under the ``osmo`` realm:

.. list-table::
   :header-rows: 1
   :widths: 15 80

   * - Purpose
     - URL
   * - Token
     - ``https://auth-<your-domain>/realms/osmo/protocol/openid-connect/token``
   * - Authorize
     - ``https://auth-<your-domain>/realms/osmo/protocol/openid-connect/auth``
   * - JWKS
     - ``https://auth-<your-domain>/realms/osmo/protocol/openid-connect/certs``
   * - Issuer
     - ``https://auth-<your-domain>/realms/osmo``
   * - Device auth
     - ``https://auth-<your-domain>/realms/osmo/protocol/openid-connect/device``
   * - Logout
     - ``https://auth-<your-domain>/realms/osmo/protocol/openid-connect/logout``

Create secrets
--------------

Create the OAuth2 Proxy secret using the client secret from :ref:`keycloak_post_installation_configuration`:

.. code-block:: bash

   $ kubectl create secret generic oauth2-proxy-secrets \
     --from-literal=client_secret=<keycloak-client-secret> \
     --from-literal=cookie_secret=$(openssl rand -base64 32) \
     --namespace osmo

OSMO Helm values for Keycloak
------------------------------

When preparing the OSMO Helm values (see :ref:`deploy_service_osmo_values`), use the Keycloak
endpoints for the ``auth``, ``oauth2Proxy``, and ``jwt`` sections. For the full deployment
procedure and all other Helm values, follow :doc:`../getting_started/deploy_service`.

Below are the Keycloak-specific sections that differ from the generic IdP examples in the
deployment guide. Replace ``<your-domain>`` with your actual domain (e.g., ``osmo.example.com``).

**Service auth configuration** (in ``osmo_values.yaml``):

.. code-block:: yaml

   services:
     service:
       auth:
         enabled: true
         device_endpoint: https://auth-<your-domain>/realms/osmo/protocol/openid-connect/device
         device_client_id: osmo-device
         browser_endpoint: https://auth-<your-domain>/realms/osmo/protocol/openid-connect/auth
         browser_client_id: osmo-browser-flow
         token_endpoint: https://auth-<your-domain>/realms/osmo/protocol/openid-connect/token
         logout_endpoint: https://auth-<your-domain>/realms/osmo/protocol/openid-connect/logout

**OAuth2 Proxy sidecar** (in ``osmo_values.yaml``):

.. code-block:: yaml

   sidecars:
     oauth2Proxy:
       enabled: true
       provider: oidc
       oidcIssuerUrl: https://auth-<your-domain>/realms/osmo
       clientId: osmo-browser-flow
       cookieDomain: .<your-domain>
       scope: "openid email profile"
       useKubernetesSecrets: true
       secretName: oauth2-proxy-secrets
       clientSecretKey: client_secret
       cookieSecretKey: cookie_secret
       extraArgs:
       - --insecure-oidc-allow-unverified-email=true

.. note::

   The ``--insecure-oidc-allow-unverified-email=true`` flag is required when using Keycloak
   because Keycloak does not set the ``email_verified`` claim to ``true`` by default. Without
   this flag, OAuth2 Proxy will reject logins from users whose email is not marked as verified.

**Envoy JWT providers** (in ``osmo_values.yaml``):

.. code-block:: yaml

   sidecars:
     envoy:
       jwt:
         user_header: x-osmo-user
         providers:
         - issuer: https://auth-<your-domain>/realms/osmo
           audience: osmo-device
           jwks_uri: https://auth-<your-domain>/realms/osmo/protocol/openid-connect/certs
           user_claim: preferred_username
           cluster: idp
         - issuer: https://auth-<your-domain>/realms/osmo
           audience: osmo-browser-flow
           jwks_uri: https://auth-<your-domain>/realms/osmo/protocol/openid-connect/certs
           user_claim: preferred_username
           cluster: idp
         - issuer: osmo
           audience: osmo
           jwks_uri: http://localhost:8000/api/auth/keys
           user_claim: unique_name
           cluster: service

.. note::

   With Keycloak, two IdP JWT providers are configured — one for the ``osmo-device`` client (CLI) and one for the ``osmo-browser-flow`` client (Web UI) — because each client has its own audience. The third provider is for OSMO-issued JWTs (access tokens).

Apply the same Keycloak endpoints to the **router** and **UI** values files. For the complete
deployment procedure including all other configuration steps, see
:doc:`../getting_started/deploy_service`.

.. _keycloak_roles_group_management:

Part 3: Keycloak Group and Role Management
===========================================

OSMO uses Keycloak's role-based access control to manage permissions for pool access and other resources. The configuration follows a hierarchical structure:

1. **Roles**: Represent specific permissions within OSMO (e.g., ``osmo-group1`` grants permission to submit workflows to ``group1-*`` pools)
2. **Groups**: Collections of users that share the same access requirements. When a role is assigned to a group, all members inherit the associated permissions
3. **Users**: Individual accounts that belong to one or more groups and inherit the roles assigned to those groups

This hierarchical approach simplifies access management by allowing administrators to grant permissions to entire teams at once rather than configuring each user individually.

Configuration Workflow
-----------------------

The typical workflow for setting up access control is:

1. Create roles in Keycloak clients (``osmo-browser-flow`` and ``osmo-device``)
2. Create groups in Keycloak
3. Assign roles to groups
4. Add users to groups (manually or via identity provider mappings)
5. Create matching pools
6. Verify access

.. _keycloak_create_roles:

Creating Roles in Keycloak
---------------------------

Roles must be created in both Keycloak clients that OSMO uses:

1. Access the Keycloak admin console and select the OSMO realm
2. Navigate to the "Clients" tab and select the ``osmo-browser-flow`` client
3. Click on the "Roles" tab, then click "Create Role"
4. Enter a name for the role following the format ``osmo-<pool-group-name>``

   For example: ``osmo-group1``

5. Click "Save"
6. Repeat steps 2-5 for the ``osmo-device`` client

.. note::

   The role name is format-sensitive. You must use the exact format ``osmo-<pool-group-name>`` for pool access roles.

.. _keycloak_create_groups:

Creating Groups in Keycloak
-----------------------------

Groups organize users and assign roles to multiple users at once:

1. In the Keycloak admin console, select the OSMO realm
2. Navigate to the "Groups" tab and click "Create Group"
3. Enter a name for the group following the format ``OSMO <pool-group-name>``

   For example: ``OSMO group1``

4. Click "Save"

.. _keycloak_assign_roles_to_groups:

Assigning Roles to Groups
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

After creating the group, assign the appropriate roles:

1. Click into the group you just created
2. Select the "Role Mapping" tab
3. Click "Assign Role"
4. Click on the filter dropdown and select "Filter by clients"
5. Search for ``osmo-<pool-group-name>`` (e.g., ``osmo-group1``)
6. Select both roles (one from ``osmo-browser-flow`` and one from ``osmo-device`` client)
7. Click "Assign"

.. note::

   The ``osmo-browser-flow`` client is used for the Web UI and the ``osmo-device`` client is used for the CLI.
   You must assign roles from both clients for full functionality.

.. _keycloak_manage_users:

Managing Users in Keycloak
===========================

Adding Users Manually
----------------------

To create users directly in the Keycloak admin console:

1. Go to the "Users" tab
2. Click "Add User"
3. Fill in the user details, add the user to the ``User`` or ``Admin`` group depending on the role you want to assign, and save
4. Click on the user's ID to access their settings. In the "Credentials" tab, enter a password with the temporary password setting enabled
5. When the temporary password setting is enabled, the user will be forced to change their password upon first login

.. note::
  The ``Admin`` group is reserved for administrators with elevated permissions for configuring OSMO and managing users.
  The ``User`` group is reserved for users with basic permissions for submitting workflows and managing their own workflows.

Adding Users to Groups
-----------------------

To add existing users to groups:

1. Navigate to the "Users" tab in the Keycloak admin console
2. Search for and select the user you want to add
3. Click on the "Groups" tab
4. Click "Join Group"
5. Select the group you want to add the user to
6. Click "Join"

.. _keycloak_identity_provider_mappings:

Configuring Identity Provider Mappings
---------------------------------------

Instead of manually adding users to groups, you can configure identity provider mappings to automatically add users to groups based on claims or metadata provided by an upstream identity provider (e.g., LDAP, SAML).
For more information, see the `Keycloak identity brokering documentation <https://www.keycloak.org/docs/latest/server_admin/index.html#_mappers>`__.

.. seealso::

   Keycloak can be configured to federate login with upstream identity providers. For detailed instructions
   on configuring SSO with identity providers in Keycloak, refer to the `official Keycloak documentation <https://www.keycloak.org/docs/latest/server_admin/index.html#_identity_broker>`__.

Verification and Testing
=========================

Verifying User Access
---------------------

To verify that a user has the correct roles:

1. Have the user log in to OSMO
2. In the Keycloak admin console, go to "Users" and find the user
3. Click on the user and select the "Groups" tab
4. Verify the user is in the expected groups
5. Select the "Role Mapping" tab and click "View all assigned roles"
6. Confirm the user has the expected roles (both from ``osmo-browser-flow`` and ``osmo-device``)

Testing Pool Access
-------------------

Test that the user can access the pool:

1. Log in to OSMO as the user
2. List available pools:

   .. code-block:: bash

      $ osmo pool list

3. Submit a test workflow to the pool:

   .. code-block:: bash

      $ osmo workflow submit my-workflow.yaml --pool group1-h100-gpu

4. If successful, the user has proper access

Troubleshooting
===============

Keycloak Deployment Issues
---------------------------

- **Pods not starting**: Check pod logs with ``kubectl logs -f <keycloak-pod> -n keycloak``. Common issues include database connectivity and incorrect secrets.
- **Ingress not accessible**: Verify DNS records point to the load balancer and the ingress is configured correctly with ``kubectl get ingress -n keycloak``.

User Cannot Access Pool
------------------------

**Symptoms**: User receives "Permission denied" or cannot see the pool

**Solutions**:

1. **Verify Role Policy**: Ensure the corresponding role has been created. Follow the steps in :ref:`troubleshooting_roles_policies`.

2. **Verify Role Names**: Pool access roles must start with ``osmo-`` prefix (see :ref:`role_naming_for_pools`). Pool names must match the role suffix. Example: Role ``osmo-team1`` will make pools named ``team1*`` visible.

3. **Check Both Clients**: Ensure roles are created in **both** ``osmo-browser-flow`` and ``osmo-device`` clients. Both roles must be assigned to the group.

4. **Verify Group Membership**: In the Keycloak admin console, check if the user appears in the group. If using IdP mappings (see :ref:`keycloak_identity_provider_mappings`):

   - Verify the mapping configuration
   - Check IdP logs to ensure claims are being sent
   - Have the user log out and log back in again. Check Keycloak logs during login and verify that the IdP claim matches the mapper configuration.

Roles Not Appearing in JWT Token
---------------------------------

**Symptoms**: User can log in but has no permissions

**Solutions**:

1. **Check Client Scope**: Verify that ``osmo-browser-flow`` and ``osmo-device`` clients have the correct client scopes configured.

2. **Review Token**: Decode the JWT token to see what roles are included. Use a tool like `jwt.io <https://jwt.io>`_ to inspect the token.

Best Practices
==============

Naming Conventions
------------------

- **Roles**: Use lowercase with hyphens: ``osmo-<team>-<purpose>``
- **Groups**: Use title case: ``OSMO <Team> <Purpose>``
- **Pools**: Match role suffix: ``<team>-<resource-type>``

Examples:
   - Role: ``osmo-ml-team``
   - Group: ``OSMO ML Team``
   - Pools: ``ml-team-training``, ``ml-team-inference``

Group Organization
------------------

1. **Use Hierarchy**: Create parent groups for departments and child groups for teams
2. **Document Purpose**: Add descriptions to groups explaining their purpose
3. **Regular Audits**: Periodically review group memberships

Security Considerations
-----------------------

1. **Principle of Least Privilege**: Only grant necessary pool access
2. **Regular Reviews**: Audit role assignments quarterly
3. **Offboarding**: Remove users from groups when they leave teams
4. **Monitor Access**: Review Keycloak audit logs for unusual activity
5. **Test Changes**: Always test role/group changes with a test user first

See Also
========

- :doc:`authentication/identity_provider_setup` for direct IdP configuration (without Keycloak)
- :doc:`authentication/roles_policies` for understanding OSMO roles and policies
- :doc:`authentication/authentication_flow` for authentication flow details
- :doc:`authentication/idp_role_mapping` for mapping IdP roles to OSMO roles
- :doc:`../getting_started/deploy_service` for the full OSMO deployment guide
- `Keycloak Documentation <https://www.keycloak.org/documentation>`_
